Viva Questions and Answers on Apex Programming in Salesforce
1. What is Apex?

Apex is a strongly typed, object-oriented programming language developed by Salesforce for building applications and business logic on the Force.com platform.

2. Why is Apex called a strongly typed language?

Because every variable must be declared with a specific data type before use.

3. Which programming language syntax is Apex similar to?

Apex syntax is similar to Java.

4. What is Salesforce?

Salesforce is a cloud-based CRM platform used for customer relationship management and application development.

5. What is Force.com?

Force.com is the application development platform provided by Salesforce for creating cloud applications.

6. What are the main features of Apex?
Strongly typed
Object-oriented
Database integrated
Easy testing support
Multitenant support
Automatic upgrades
7. What is SOQL?

SOQL (Salesforce Object Query Language) is used to retrieve records from Salesforce objects.

Example:

SELECT Id, Name FROM Account
8. What is SOSL?

SOSL (Salesforce Object Search Language) is used to search multiple objects and fields simultaneously.

9. What is a DML statement in Apex?

DML (Data Manipulation Language) statements are used to insert, update, delete, and upsert records.

Example:

insert acc;
update acc;
delete acc;
10. What are sObjects?

sObjects are Salesforce database objects like Account, Contact, Lead, etc.

11. What is a trigger in Apex?

A trigger is Apex code that executes automatically when database events occur such as insert, update, or delete.

12. What is the difference between Trigger and Class?
Trigger	Class
Executes automatically	Called manually
Used on database events	Used for business logic
Cannot be invoked directly	Can be invoked
13. What is Governor Limit?

Governor Limits are runtime limits enforced by Salesforce to ensure efficient resource usage in a multitenant environment.

14. Why are Governor Limits important?

They prevent one user's code from consuming excessive shared resources.

15. What is a multitenant environment?

A multitenant environment means multiple users or organizations share the same resources and infrastructure.

16. What is a Visualforce page?

A Visualforce page is a user interface framework used to create custom pages in Salesforce.

17. What is the use of Apex Classes?

Apex classes contain business logic and methods used in Salesforce applications.

18. What is unit testing in Apex?

Unit testing verifies whether Apex code works correctly.

19. What is the minimum test coverage required in Salesforce?

At least 75% code coverage is required for deployment.

20. What is the use of System.debug()?

It is used to print debugging messages in logs.

Example:

System.debug('Hello');
21. What are collections in Apex?

Collections store multiple values together.
Types:

List
Set
Map
22. What is a List in Apex?

A List stores ordered elements and allows duplicates.

Example:

List<String> names = new List<String>();
23. What is a Set in Apex?

A Set stores unique values only.

24. What is a Map in Apex?

A Map stores data in key-value pairs.

25. What is the difference between SOQL and SOSL?
SOQL	SOSL
Searches one object	Searches multiple objects
Similar to SELECT	Similar to search
Returns specific records	Returns broader search results
26. What is the use of “if” condition in Apex?

It controls the flow of execution based on conditions.

27. What is a loop in Apex?

Loops are used to execute a block of code repeatedly.

Types:

for loop
while loop
do-while loop
28. What is an Apex transaction?

An Apex transaction is a set of operations executed as a single unit.

29. What happens when Apex code exceeds governor limits?

The system throws a runtime exception and stops execution.

30. What are the advantages of Apex?
Easy integration with Salesforce database
Java-like syntax
Secure execution
Cloud-based development
Automatic upgrades
Important Short Viva Questions
Q. Can Apex directly interact with database objects?

Yes, using SOQL and DML operations.

Q. Is Apex compiled or interpreted?

Apex is compiled into metadata and executed by the Apex runtime interpreter.

Q. Which editions support Apex?

Enterprise, Unlimited, Performance, and Developer editions.

Q. Can Apex be used for web services?

Yes, Apex supports REST and SOAP web services.

Q. What is the use of inline SOQL?

Inline SOQL allows querying directly inside Apex code.

Common Interview/Viva Questions
1. Why do we use Apex instead of configuration tools?

Apex is used when complex business logic cannot be implemented using declarative tools like flows or validation rules.

2. Explain the working structure of Apex.
Developer writes Apex code.
Salesforce compiles and stores it as metadata.
When triggered by user action, runtime interpreter executes it.
3. Explain DML operations.

DML operations manipulate records in database:

Insert
Update
Delete
Upsert
Merge
4. What is code coverage?

Code coverage measures how much Apex code is tested by unit tests.

5. What are the development tools for Apex?
Developer Console
Visual Studio Code with Salesforce Extensions
Salesforce CLI