Viva Questions and Answers – SaaS Cloud Setup using VMware ESXi and HDFS
1. What is Cloud Computing?

Cloud computing is the delivery of computing services like servers, storage, databases, and software over the internet or network.

2. What is SaaS?

SaaS (Software as a Service) is a cloud model where software applications are provided to users through a network without local installation.

3. What is VMware ESXi?

VMware ESXi is a Type-1 hypervisor used to create and manage virtual machines directly on hardware.

4. What is a Hypervisor?

A hypervisor is software that creates and manages virtual machines.

5. What are the types of Hypervisors?
Type-1 Hypervisor (Bare Metal)
Type-2 Hypervisor (Hosted)
6. Which type of hypervisor is ESXi?

ESXi is a Type-1 hypervisor.

7. What is HDFS?

Hadoop Distributed File System is a distributed file system used to store large files across multiple systems.

8. What is the purpose of HDFS in this project?

HDFS stores encrypted file blocks in distributed storage.

9. What is a NameNode?

NameNode manages metadata and tracks file locations in HDFS.

10. What is a DataNode?

DataNode stores actual file blocks in HDFS.

11. Why are files divided into blocks?

Files are divided into blocks for efficient distributed storage and fault tolerance.

12. What is Encryption?

Encryption converts readable data into unreadable format for security.

13. Which encryption method is used in the program?

Fernet symmetric encryption is used.

14. What is Symmetric Encryption?

In symmetric encryption, the same key is used for encryption and decryption.

15. What is the advantage of cloud storage?
Scalability
Remote access
Centralized management
Data backup
16. What is Virtualization?

Virtualization is the creation of virtual versions of hardware, operating systems, or storage devices.

17. What is a Virtual Machine?

A virtual machine is a software-based computer running inside a physical computer.

18. What is vCenter?

VMware vCenter Server is used to centrally manage ESXi hosts and clusters.

19. What is a Cluster in VMware?

A cluster is a group of ESXi hosts managed together.

20. What is DRS?

DRS (Distributed Resource Scheduler) balances workloads among virtual machines.

21. What is Failover?

Failover transfers workloads to another host when one host fails.

22. What is the purpose of DNS configuration in ESXi?

DNS helps resolve hostnames into IP addresses.

23. What is LAN?

LAN (Local Area Network) is a network connecting systems within a limited area.

24. What command is used to upload files to HDFS?
hdfs dfs -put filename /path
25. What command is used to download files from HDFS?
hdfs dfs -get /path filename
26. Why is Ubuntu used in this project?

Ubuntu provides good support for Hadoop and cloud tools.

27. What is the role of Python in this project?

Python is used to automate file splitting, encryption, upload, download, and merging.

28. What is block size in HDFS?

Block size is the size of file chunks stored in HDFS. Default is usually 128 MB.

29. What happens if one DataNode fails?

HDFS retrieves data from replicated copies stored on other DataNodes.

30. What is Replication in HDFS?

Replication stores multiple copies of file blocks for fault tolerance.

31. What is the advantage of using ESXi?
Efficient resource utilization
Multiple VM support
Better performance
Centralized management
32. What are the minimum RAM requirements for ESXi?

Minimum 4 GB RAM is required.

33. What is the function of the NameNode format command?
hdfs namenode -format

It initializes the HDFS filesystem metadata.

34. What is meant by private cloud?

A private cloud is a cloud infrastructure used by a single organization over private networks.

35. What are the cloud service models?
SaaS
PaaS
IaaS
36. Difference between SaaS and IaaS?
SaaS provides software services.
IaaS provides infrastructure resources like servers and storage.
37. What is the purpose of block encryption?

It protects data from unauthorized access.

38. What is the use of VMware clusters?

Clusters improve resource sharing, scalability, and availability.

39. What is a Root Password in ESXi?

It is the administrator password used for managing the ESXi host.

40. What is the conclusion of this experiment?

A private SaaS cloud was successfully configured using VMware ESXi and HDFS with secure encrypted file storage and retrieval.